Story Recapped here.
Today, I'm going to show you a drama, sci-fi,
thriller film called “Gattaca.”
Spoilers ahead!
Watch out and take care.
In the future, humans have perfected genetic
sequencing and DNA manipulation.
Parents now have the choice to edit their
children’s genes during insemination.
Diseases can now be eliminated, as well as
bad traits such as body odor, baldness, and
undesirable physical characteristics can be
removed.
Lives are considerably longer and humans now
enjoy the benefits of living a long and healthy
life.
These edited babies have become the norm and
are classified as valid members of society.
Even with this advancement, some humans are
still conceived and born naturally.
These natural-born and naturally conceived
people are treated as second-class citizens
and are derogatorily called faith-births or
God children and are classified as in-valids.
Jerome Morrow prepares to head to work as
a mission navigator in Gattaca.
It’s noticeable that his morning routine
is unlike any normal person’s morning preparations.
He begins by shaving as much excess hair as
he can.
After a shower, he gets into an incinerator
and removes all the dead skin from his body
before burning it.
He takes a urine pack and conceals it around
his thigh.
He then takes a fake fingertip, filling it
with blood stored in a fridge and places it
on his own.
At his desk, Jerome cleans his keyboard, using
a small vacuum to remove any dead skin or
hair.
His boss, Director Josef, approaches and tells
Jerome he’ll be a mission flight navigator
on a flight to Saturn’s moon, Titan.
He also informs Jerome that he’ll be undergoing
a substance test soon.
Josef leaves and Jerome plants several dead
skin particles from a container into his keyboard,
and places a strand of hair on his comb.
At the clinic, Jerome gives the doctor, Lamar,
his urine sample.
Lamar tests the urine and the result shows
Jerome is a valid individual.
Lamar mentions his son and tells Jerome to
remind him to mention him another time.
Irene Cassini, a colleague, approaches Jerome
and congratulates him.
The pair watch rockets launch into space,
and Irene comments that it’s only Jerome
who watches the launches daily.
Jerome then walks back to his desk but notices
his colleagues gathering.
Jerome thinks about how his selection as flight
navigator had been guaranteed since his birth
but reveals, through thought, that he isn’t
Jerome Morrow.
In a flashback, Antonio and Marie Freeman,
conceive Vincent through a natural process.
Marie gives birth to a healthy baby boy, but
a nurse draws blood and runs it through a
machine that can predict the possibility of
future illnesses.
Antonio listens as the nurse recites all the
possible illnesses and medical conditions
that the baby could suffer.
This included myopia, heart disease, and a
life expectancy close to 30 years.
Antonio names the baby Vincent, and Marie
cradles the infant in her arms.
It’s revealed that this baby, Vincent, is
the one portraying Jerome.
Determined to prevent the situation happening
a second time, the couple decides to have
a second baby but have its genes altered.
A doctor explains that their next baby would
have no disposition to any inheritable disease.
He also tells them that he took the liberty
to remove any potentially prejudicial conditions
such as baldness, alcoholism, myopia, and
obesity.
Marie tells the doctor they only wanted the
diseases removed and nothing else, but the
doctor answers that they would want their
child to have the best possible start in life,
considering the amount of imperfection naturally
built into humans.
This is how Vincent’s brother, Anton, came
into the world.
Even at their early years, the effect of gene
manipulation is immediately noticeable.
Anton is growing faster and stronger than
Vincent even though he’s younger.
Vincent also notices his parents’ liking
for Anton.
Vincent develops a small distaste of his brother.
As a child, Vincent develops a liking for
outer space, space travel, and dreams of becoming
an astronaut.
His parents try to discourage him, considering
his underlying medical conditions.
Antonio tells him that Vincent would only
be allowed on a spaceship if he were to clean
it.
As a young man, Vincent realizes this soon
enough as he’s rejected at all of his screenings
and job applications.
The two boys, now older, compete with one
another to see who could swim the farthest.
Anton always wins but this time, Vincent felt
something was going to change.
Determined to beat his brother, Vincent overtakes
Anton and leads the race.
Finally, Anton becomes too exhausted and starts
sinking.
Vincent quickly comes to his brother’s aid,
rescuing him, and leading him back to shore.
This, Vincent believes, was the single moment
in their lives where Anton was not as strong
as he believed, and Vincent was not as weak.
Vincent then decides to leave his family once
and for all.
He begins work at Gattaca as a janitor.
Vincent fantasizes of working in Gattaca,
staring blankly at the workers coming in daily.
He sits in one of the desks and pretends as
if he were working as a navigator.
Vincent continues studying and training, but
he realizes he’ll never get the chance to
achieve his dreams because of his genes.
Having no other choice, he gets in contact
with a gentleman who offers his services in
creating identities.
Vincent gets the opportunity to become a valid
individual.
He is introduced to Jerome Morrow, a genetically
superior man who suffered an accident and
is now a paraplegic.
Jerome has a high IQ, perfect vision, superior
strength, and a long lifespan.
Now being a paraplegic, Jerome would no longer
have use for his superior DNA; a paraplegic
weakling would no longer be accepted into
society.
Jerome is then reduced to selling his DNA
and identity to continue living comfortably.
Vincent would pose as Jerome in Gattaca, and
he would give a portion of his salary to sustain
Jerome.
Vincent has to wear contact lenses both to
see and to match his eye color with Jerome’s.
He then changes his hair cut and appearance,
making it look as close to Jerome as possible.
Finally, he gets surgery to lengthen his legs.
Time soon came for Vincent to apply for Gattaca.
He brings a sample of Jerome’s urine and
blood.
As soon as it’s confirmed that his genes
are valid, he gets in.
Each day, Vincent would have to dispose of
loose skin, fingernails, and hair.
He would then bring Jerome’s urine, blood,
and other DNA traces for the constant tests.
While Jerome supplied the DNA, Vincent provided
money.
Snapping out of his flashback, he moves closer
to his crowding colleagues and sees that a
mission director has been beaten to death.
Investigators swarm Gattaca, retrieving as
much DNA trace as they could.
Vincent has unknowingly left one of his eyelashes,
and one of the investigators picks it up for
testing.
Vincent is worried he won’t be able to launch
for Titan because of the incident but Josef
assures him everything would still proceed
as scheduled.
Jerome is concerned that Vincent’s DNA might
get detected during the investigation but
Vincent tells him not to worry.
He speculates that he’d already be on his
way to Titan by the time they find out about
his fake identity.
The pair then head out to celebrate.
Back in Gattaca, Irene is suspicious of Vincent
and looks through Vincent’s desk for hair
strands or dead skin that she can have tested.
She finds Jerome’s hair strand and takes
it to a DNA processing station.
She is relieved to see that the person she
knows as Jerome, is valid.
After a night out, Jerome and Vincent arrive
home, and Vincent puts Jerome to bed.
Jerome reveals that his accident was no accident
at all.
He had willingly stepped in front of a moving
vehicle in an effort to end his life.
He then tells Vincent that he’s proud, and
Vincent tells Jerome that he’s drunk and
should go to sleep.
At a police laboratory, Vincent’s in-valid
DNA pops up, and the primary investigator
working on the case takes notice.
The following day, the investigators are back
at Gattaca, placing the eyelash owner as their
primary suspect.
They find out that the man, Vincent Freeman,
worked at Gattaca as a janitor.
The head investigator says that, according
to the invalid’s records, he should already
be dead by that time.
Not wanting to leave any stone unturned, he
proposes they sift through entry logs, believing
the killer could be working in Gattaca.
Later on, Vincent meets with Irene.
Irene then admits that she had procured his
hair strand and had him tested and apologizes.
She reveals to Vincent that, though her genes
were engineered, she still had a high risk
of heart failure, preventing her from joining
any mission to space.
She offers a hair strand in return but Vincent
dismisses it, saying he doesn’t need to
have her tested to fully trust her.
At home, Vincent tells Jerome that the police
found his eyelash at the scene, and now, Vincent
is a suspect.
He’s concerned that he’ll get recognized
and considers escaping.
Jerome gets angry, telling Vincent he’s
being too paranoid.
Jerome assures Vincent that he won’t get
recognized as they’ll think it an impossibility
that one of their own elites had been an invalid
all this time.
Later that evening, Vincent heads out with
Irene on a date.
In Gattaca, the head investigator orders the
cops to have a look at the trash as there
could be more evidence.
He also orders checkpoints and routine checks
around the city to filter any invalids posing
as valids.
After enjoying a lovely piano concert, Irene
and Vincent drive down a highway before running
into a checkpoint.
The cops are checking the eyes, looking for
contact lenses.
Vincent discreetly removes his contacts but
is rendered blind.
They get through the checkpoint without arousing
suspicion.
Down the road, Irene tells Vincent she wants
to show him something.
She parks the car at the side of the road
and crosses the street through a gauntlet
of high-speed moving vehicles.
Vincent follows but is having trouble seeing
without his contact lenses.
His vision is reduced to a blurry mess of
lights and shapes, but with determination,
he makes it across.
The couple arrives at a solar farm, watching
the sunrise.
While romantically strolling down the farm,
Irene notices Vincent’s eyes looking different
but dismisses it immediately.
At the crime lab, the investigators get another
confirmation of Vincent’s DNA from a paper
cup in the trash.
They suspect that Vincent could be in disguise,
working in Gattaca.
The head investigator finds this improbable,
because an invalid would fail to meet the
mental capacity or the physical stamina required
to work at Gattaca.
The cop suggests drawing blood from every
employee in Gattaca to better filter out the
imposter.
The next day, Vincent lines up to get his
blood taken for testing.
He enters a room and Lamar starts drawing
blood.
Luckily, Vincent came prepared with a vial
of Jerome’s blood.
As Lamar injects him, Jerome flinches, as
if in pain and gets up.
He quickly swaps the vials and hands Lamar
the vial with Jerome’s blood.
With the mass blood testing yielding no significant
information, the investigators want to request
another test but Josef refuses, stating they’ve
wasted too much time.
With the launch in two days, he doesn’t
want more setbacks that could interfere with
the schedule.The investigators have no choice
but to leave.
Irene and Vincent go on another date, this
time at a fine dining restaurant.
Vincent asks Irene to dance, and the two share
an intimate moment.
Vincent tells Irene that all he’s ever wanted
is to leave the planet.
He finds it a comedic irony that, with the
launch so close, he finally finds a reason
to stay.
In the middle of their moment, the police
burst in and ask everyone to stay inside.
Caught completely off guard, Vincent drags
Irene outside, exiting through the back door.
A cop tries to stop them but Vincent assaults
him, pummeling his face, rendering him unconscious.
He takes Irene and the pair find a hiding
spot.
The head investigator calls out to Vincent
in the alley, looking more concerned and worried
than determined.
Irene asks who Vincent is.
Vincent almost answers, but she tells him
to keep quiet.
Irene chooses to stay ignorant.
She leans in closer, and the two kiss.
The two spend a night together, and Vincent
wakes up in Irene’s bed.
Worried he’ll leave traces of DNA, Vincent
heads to the shore and desperately scrubs
himself clean with a rock.
He goes back to Irene’s house, and she notices
his surgery scars.
Vincent tells her that he got it from an accident,
and Irene plays along.
At the police headquarters, the head investigator
examines a photo of Jerome and cross-references
it with a picture of Vincent.
The next day, the head investigator is at
Vincent’s desk, examining it for DNA.
Josef assures him that Vincent, he calls Jerome,
is one of their best employees and has nothing
to do with the murder.
Irene sees this and warns Vincent.
The detective catches up with Irene and brings
her to see Jerome at home.
Meanwhile, the cop examines the murder victim
and retrieves saliva from the victim’s eye.
Seeing Irene and the detective leave, VIncent
calls Jerome, telling him the investigator
is on his way.
Jerome then drags himself up the stairs, pulling
himself up every step.
As the doorbell rings, Jerome barely gets
to the intercom.
He gets to a chair and sits himself as the
investigator and Irene enter.
Irene sees the real Jerome, for the first
time, and is incredibly confused but keeps
her demeanor.
Jerome and Irene act as if they’ve known
each other, and the investigator suspects
something is not what it seems.
He takes Jerome’s blood and runs it through
his DNA reader.
He proceeds down the stairs but suddenly gets
a call from the cop that the suspect has been
apprehended.
The investigator rushes back up and leaves.
Vincent appears behind Jerome and Irene is
distraught to learn she’s been lied to.
Vincent chases after her but Irene distrusts
him.
Vincent finally admits to her that he’s
an invalid and tells her he has far exceeded
his projected life expectancy.
Vincent tells Irene that invalids are not
just a reflection of their predicted outcome,
but are much more.
Irene gives Vincent a confused and shocked
look, and leaves.
At the precinct, the cop has apprehended Director
Josef.
It’s revealed that the victim was a big
hindrance to the flight to Titan and wanted
to cancel it.
With the flight only happening once every
seventy years, the director felt like he needed
to do everything to ensure the flight stays
on schedule.
The suspect is caught and the case is closed
but the investigator looks unsatisfied.
That night, Vincent finds the investigator
at his desk.
Vincent confronts him and the investigator
asks Vincent how he can’t recognize him.
The investigator reveals himself as Anton,
Vincent's long lost brother.
He tells Vincent their parent’s died not
knowing Vincent is still alive.
Vincent becomes defensive, saying Anton is
only after him because he can’t accept that
an invalid can have such a prestigious position.
Anton expresses his concern about the amount
of fraud Vincent has undergone.
Anton asks Vincent to come with him, and to
stop his illegal activities.
Vincent raises his voice, saying Anton only
wants to see him fail.
Anton then challenges Vincent to another swimming
contest.
The brothers head to the stormy shore, strip
down, and head into the water.
They start swimming, getting farther and farther
from land.
Anton starts struggling and asks Vincent to
stop.
Vincent taunts him, and they continue.
Anton asks Vincent how he’s got so far with
his life.
Vincent answers he got this far because he
never hesitated or doubted himself in whatever
he does.
Anton tries to swim back but starts drowning.
Vincent comes in for the rescue and they swim
back to shore.
Vincent finds Irene and she guesses Vincent’s
eyesight was bad that night they tried to
cross the street, but he appreciates him still
crossing the street for her.
Vincent gives her a strand of hair if she
still wants to have him tested, but Irene
lets it loose in the wind.
At their house, Jerome tells Vincent that
he’s left enough genetic material for him
when he returns.
Vincent asks why he’d left so many and Jerome
says that he might also be going on a trip
of his own.
Jerome thanks Vincent for sharing his life
with him.
Vincent may have gotten Jerome’s body, but
Jerome achieved Vincent’s dream.
Vincent gave Jerome a sense of fulfilment
he couldn’t attain before, and for that,
he thanks him.
Jerome hands him an envelope and Vincent leaves
for the launch.
At Gattaca, Lamar informs Vincent that a new
policy has been put in place, asking the passengers
to have their urine tested before the flight.
Vincent didn’t bring a pack of Jerome’s
urine and is left with no choice but to fill
it with his own.
Lamar runs the test and Vincent comes out
as invalid.
Lamar then tells Vincent about his son, who
idolizes Vincent.
His son wanted to apply for work in Gattaca
but was rejected, deemed having an inferior
gene.
It’s revealed that Lamar had known since
the beginning that Vincent had a fake identity
and kept it to himself.
He sees Vincent as a living antithesis for
those thinking invalids would never amount
to anything.
Lamar changes the result, marking Vincent
as valid.
Vincent then boards the spacecraft and waits
for the launch procedure.
Meanwhile, Jerome crawls into the incinerator
and waits for the fire to ignite.
As flames engulf him, he lays peacefully motionless.
The rocket launches, beginning its flight
to Titan.
As the ship exits the atmosphere, Vincent
opens the envelope and sees a lock of Jerome’s
hair.